---
layout: post
title:  "Habits"
categories: psychology
tags: [psychology neuroscience]
published: true
last_modified_at: 2019/02/19
---

A habit is an automatic behavior that happens when we encounter a specific setting or situation. Habits are cognitively efficient, because the automation of common actions frees mental resources for other tasks.

Habit formation is associated with the _basal ganglia_, a group of subcortical nuclei (clusters of neurons) which are located at the base of the forebrain. The largest structure is the _striatum_ which coordinates multiple aspects of cognition, decision-making, motivation and reinforcement.

The habit loop consists of:

  **Cue --> Routine --> Reward**

- the cue is something that triggers the routine
- the routine is the actual behavior, a group of many different actions
- reward is a positive feeling that reinforces the habit loop

The release of dopamine in the striatum is actually related to the _expectation_ of reward, and not to the reward itself.

Forming a new habit may take about 10 weeks, although this can vary, and simpler actions become habits more quickly. When trying to create a new habit you need to have a clearly defined cue, like specific time of day or event, before starting the routine. At the end, come up with a reward you can use each time to keep you going.
Once a habit is formed it cannot be "unlearned" but it can be reprogrammed.

_Keystone habits_ are especially important as they can lead to the formation of other habits and can have far reaching consequences. An example of a _keystone habit_ is exercising regularly - it can affect a person's eating, drinking, spending habits, etc.

The most effective way to change a habit is to leave the same cue and reward, and only change the routine. The tricky part is identifying the cue (when it happens) and the reward (why we keep doing it) which requires conscious effort as well as strong enough desire to change the habit.
Cues usually belong to one of five categories: _time_, _location_, _emotional state_, _other people_, or _immediately preceding action_.
Rewards satisfy cravings, so in order to determine what the reward in a habit loop is, it may help to identify what the associated cravings are.

Two other components related to habits are _willpower_ and _belief_.
Willpower is often compared to a muscle - it can be strengthened by self-control exercises and is also exhausted if used too often. It can be greatly reduced by factors such as hunger (drop of insulin levels). Willpower is important when creating or changing habits, but it also benefits from good habits because when the behavior becomes automatic it no longer requires willpower which can then be directed to other purposes.
Belief is crucial to the formation and especially modification of habits. Often it is related to a higher power, religious or spiritual, and is much easier to grow among a social group of people sharing the same beliefs. It is what keeps us going when things get really hard.
